---
layout: page
title: "Introduction"
comments: false
sharing: true
footer: true
---
The mass balance of the major ice sheets, and therefore their contribution to global sea-level rise, is controlled primarily by the speed of fast-flowing ice streams and outlet glaciers, which terminate in ocean waters. In Antarctica, ~90% of discharge at the coast flows through ice streams ([Bennett, 2003][#Bennett2003]), whereas in Greenland, around 50% is lost by iceberg calving at the margins of tidewater outlet glaciers, and 50% runs off as meltwater (Rignot and Kanagaratnam, 2006). Greenland’s ice discharge doubled during the early 2000s, primarily as a result of increased flow rates of these tidewater glaciers (Rignot and Kanagaratnam, 2006; Howat et al., 2008; Wouters et al., 2008), almost certainly triggered by changes in the temperatures of the ocean waters at their calving margins (Straneo, 2010; Murray et al., in press).

{% pullquote %}
On these Greenland tidewater glaciers, {" flow rates up to 20 m per day are common. "} The surfaces of such fast moving glaciers are heavily crevassed and change rapidly (Fig. 1), and are thus extremely difficult places to emplace and maintain observational networks, and hence the majority of knowledge of their dynamics is derived from remote sensing. However, such measurements are limited temporally by the repeat cycle of satellites (typically 10s or more days) and spatially (~10s metres). On the Antarctic ice streams, flow rates are ~1 m day-1, and here GPS measurements provide evidence of rich phenomena, such as tidal modulation of the flow, at much higher temporal frequencies, and also conversely at much lower frequencies than these remotely sensed measurements can provide (e.g., Bindschadler et al., 2003; Anandakrishnan et al., 2003; Gudmundsson, 2006; Murray et al., 2008). However, typical survey grade GPS instruments as used in these Antarctic studies are expensive (~£40k) and they require visitation to download the stored data: both make these inappropriate where ice flow rates are higher and the risk of instrument loss is significant. Some progress has been made using single frequency “disposable” GPS receivers on tidewater glaciers (e.g., [East Greenland Glacier Dynamics](http://facility.unavco.org/highlights/2008/east-greenland.html); [Disposable GPS](http://www.meltfactor.org/mov/Ian_Howat_Disposable_GPS_16_May_2008.mov)), but technological limits restrict the accuracy of the measurements that can be undertaken. In preparing this bid, we have been in contact with the PIs of these prior studies to solicit advice have positive relationships in place with both groups.
{% endpullquote %}

We plan to design, install and operate a network of dual frequency GNSS sensors on heavily crevassed and rapidly deforming ice. The extreme nature of the operating environment presents unique challenges for measurement observation and data transmission. No single technical approach    can deliver the requisite glacier dynamics at the required resolution. Therefore, the network will consist of a minimum number of GNSS sensor nodes linked into clusters of low-cost wireless sensors forming a wide-area wireless sensor network (WSN). Wireless technology combined with distributed networking concepts will be deployed to provide self-healing, adaptable and scalable networks tolerant of node loss. The WSN will support accurate self-positioning, resilience and low energy consumption requirements. Readily available IEEE 802.15x and .11x technologies powered by battery and solar cells offer a baseline wireless infrastructure. The GNSS sensors will take advantage of the latest OEM technologies to provide multi-frequency/constellation observables. In-house software, running on each node, will process data on an epoch-by-epoch basis ensuring no loss of coordinate data in the event of sensor failure or loss, thus providing maximum temporal and spatial coverage. By exploiting multihop routing and distributed processing concepts, nodes of the WSN will link with the GNSS sensor nodes to transfer and process data in real-time.